Eighteenth Series, Vol. VI No. 2 Saturday, February 01, 2025
Magha 12, 1946 (Saka)
LOK SABHA DEBATES
(Original Version)
Fourth Session
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha)
(Vol. VI contains Nos.1 to 10)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
f
EDITORIAL BOARD
Utpal Kumar Singh
Secretary-General
Lok Sabha
Mamta Kemwal
Joint Secretary
Bishan Kumar
Director
Narad Prasad Kimothi
Sunita Thapliyal
Joint Director
Maneesha Bhushan
Deputy Director
© 2025 Lok Sabha Secretariat
None of the material may be copied, reproduced, distributed, republished, downloaded, displayed,
posted or transmitted in any form or by any means, including but not limited to, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of Lok Sabha
Secretariat. However, the material can be displayed, copied, distributed and downloaded for
personal, non-commercial use only, provided the material is not modified and all copyright and
other proprietary notices contained in the material are retained.
01.02.2025 1
C O N T E N T S
Eighteenth Series, Vol. VI, Fourth Session, 2025/1946 (Saka)
No. 2, Saturday, February 01, 2025/ Magha 12, 1946 (Saka)
S U B J E C T P A G E S
UNION BUDGET–2025-2026
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman 5-42
STATEMENTS RE:
(i) MEDIUM-TERM FISCAL POLICY CUM
FISCAL POLICY STRATEGY;
AND
(ii) MACRO-ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
Shrimati Nirmala Sitharaman 42
FINANCE BILL, 2025 43
01.02.2025 2
OFFICERS OF LOK SABHA
THE SPEAKER
Shri Om Birla
PANEL OF CHAIRPERSONS
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Shri P. C. Mohan
Shrimati Sandhya Ray
Shri Dilip Saikia
Kumari Selja
Shri A. Raja
Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
Shri Krishna Prasad Tenneti
Shri Awadhesh Prasad
SECRETARY GENERAL
Shri Utpal Kumar Singh
01.02.2025 3
LOK SABHA DEBATES
LOK SABHA
----------
Saturday, February 01, 2025/ Magha 12, 1946 (Saka)
The Lok Sabha met at Eleven of the Clock.
[HON. SPEAKER in the Chair]
01.02.2025 4
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : माननीय सद(cid:214)यगण, आइटम नंबर – 1, माननीय िव(cid:176) म(cid:253)ं ी, (cid:174)ीमती िनम(cid:170)ला
सीतारमण ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : माननीय सद(cid:214)यगण, म(cid:167) बजट के बाद रा(cid:213)(cid:367)पित अिभभाषण पर ध(cid:198)यवाद (cid:255)(cid:214)ताव
क(cid:236) चचा(cid:170) म(cid:164) आपको पया(cid:170)(cid:302) समय और पया(cid:170)(cid:302) अवसर दूंगा ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : मेरा आपसे यह िनवेदन है ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : माननीय अिखलेश जी, आप संसद क(cid:236) मया(cid:170)दा को बनाकर रख(cid:164) ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : बजट भाषण के अंदर इस तरीके से कभी नह(cid:233) ह(cid:242)आ ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : यह उिचत नह(cid:233) है ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : अिखलेश जी, (cid:200)लीज़ । म(cid:167) आपको रा(cid:213)(cid:367)पित अिभभाषण पर बोलने का मौका दूगं ा ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : यह तरीका ठीक नह(cid:233) है ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : रा(cid:213)(cid:367)पित अिभ भाषण पर चचा(cid:170) होगी ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : नह(cid:233), यह तरीका नह(cid:233) है ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
01.02.2025 5
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : माननीय िव(cid:176) म(cid:253)ं ी जी ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
11.01 hrs

UNION BUDGET–2025-2026
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Hon. Speaker, I present the Budget for
2025-26.
Introduction
This Budget continues our Government’s efforts to:
a) accelerate growth,
b) secure inclusive development,
c) invigorate private sector investments,
d) uplift household sentiments, and
e) enhance spending power of India’s rising middle class.
Together, we embark on a journey to unlock our nation’s tremendous
potential for greater prosperity and global positioning under the leadership of
hon. Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi. … (Interruptions)
As we complete the first quarter of the 21st century, continuing geopolitical
headwinds suggest lower global economic growth over the medium term. …
(Interruptions) However, our aspiration for a Viksit Bharat inspires us, and the
 Placed in Library, See No. LT 1870 /18/25.
01.02.2025 6
transformative work we have done during our Government’s first two terms guides
us, to march forward resolutely. … (Interruptions)
Budget Theme
Our economy is the fastest-growing among all major global economies. Our
development track record for the past 10 years and structural reforms have drawn
global attention. … (Interruptions) Confidence in India’s capability and potential
has only grown in this period. We see the next five years as a unique opportunity
to realize ‘Sabka Vikas’, stimulating balanced growth of all regions.
The great Telugu poet and playwright Gurajada Appa Rao had said,
‘Desamante Matti Kaadoi, Desamante Manushuloi’; meaning, ‘A country is not just
its soil, a country is its people.’ In line with this, for us, Viksit Bharat,
encompasses:
a) zero-poverty;
b) hundred per cent good quality school education;
c) access to high-quality, affordable, and comprehensive healthcare;
d) hundred per cent skilled labour with meaningful employment;
e) seventy per cent women in economic activities; and
f) farmers making our country the ‘food basket of the world’. … (Interruptions)
11.04 hrs
At this stage Shri Dharmendra Yadav and some other hon. Members
came and stood on the floor near the Table.
… (Interruptions)
In this Budget, the proposed development measures span ten broad areas
focusing on Garib, Youth, Annadata and Nari.
01.02.2025 7
1) Spurring Agricultural Growth and Productivity;
2) Building Rural Prosperity and Resilience;
3) Taking Everyone Together on an Inclusive Growth path;
4) Boosting Manufacturing and Furthering Make in India;
5) Supporting MSMEs;
6) Enabling Employment-led Development;
7) Investing in people, economy and innovation;
8) Securing Energy Supplies;
9) Promoting Exports; and
10) Nurturing Innovation.
11.05 hrs
At this stage, Shri Rahul Gandhi, Shri Akhilesh Yadav,
Shrimati Kanimozhi Karunanidhi and some other hon. Members left the House.
… (Interruptions)
11.05 ½ hrs
At this stage, Shri Dharmendra Yadav and some other hon. Members
left the House.
… (Interruptions)
For this journey of development,
a) Our four powerful engines are: Agriculture, MSME, Investments, and
Exports
b) The fuel: our Reforms
c) Our guiding spirit: Inclusivity
d) And the destination: Viksit Bharat
01.02.2025 8
This Budget aims to initiate transformative reforms across six domains.
During the first five years, these will augment our growth potential and global
competitiveness. The domains are:
1) Taxation;
2) Power Sector;
3) Urban Development;
4) Mining;
5) Financial Sector; and
6) Regulatory Reforms.
Agriculture as the 1st Engine
Now I move to specific proposals, beginning with ‘Agriculture as the 1st
Engine’.
Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana - Developing Agri Districts
Programme
Motivated by the success of the Aspirational Districts Programme, our
Government will undertake a ‘Prime Minister Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana’ in
partnership with States. Through the convergence of existing schemes and
specialized measures, the programme will cover 100 districts with low
productivity, moderate crop intensity and below-average credit parameters. It aims
to (1) enhance agricultural productivity, (2) adopt crop diversification and
sustainable agriculture practices, (3) augment post-harvest storage at the
panchayat and block level, (4) improve irrigation facilities, and (5) facilitate
availability of long-term and short-term credit. This programme is likely to help 1.7
01.02.2025 9
crore farmers.
Building Rural Prosperity and Resilience
A comprehensive multi-sectoral ‘Rural Prosperity and Resilience’
programme will be launched in partnership with States. This will address under-
employment in agriculture through skilling, investment, technology, and
invigorating the rural economy. The goal is to generate ample opportunities in
rural areas so that migration is an option, but not a necessity.
The programme will focus on rural women, young farmers, rural youth,
marginal and small farmers, and landless families.
Global and domestic best practices will be incorporated and appropriate
technical and financial assistance will be sought from multilateral development
banks. In Phase-1, 100 developing agri-districts will be covered.
Aatmanirbharta in Pulses
Our Government is implementing the National Mission for Edible Oilseed for
achieving atmanirbhrata in edible oils. Our farmers have the capability to grow
enough for our needs and more.
Ten years ago, we made concerted efforts and succeeded in achieving
near self-sufficiency in pulses. Farmers responded to the need by increasing the
cultivated area by 50 per cent and Government arranged for procurement and
remunerative prices. Since then, with rising incomes and better affordability, our
consumption of pulses has increased significantly.
Our Government will now launch a 6-year “Mission for Aatmanirbharta in
Pulses” with a special focus on Tur, Urad and Masoor. Central agencies such as
01.02.2025 10
NAFED and NCCF will be ready to procure these three pulses, as much as
offered during the next four years from farmers who register with these agencies
and enter into agreements.
Comprehensive Programme for Vegetables & Fruits
It is encouraging that our people are increasingly becoming aware of their
nutritional needs. It is a sign of a society becoming healthier. With rising income
levels, the consumption of vegetables, fruits and shree-anna is increasing
significantly.
A comprehensive programme to promote production, efficient supplies,
processing, and remunerative prices for farmers will be launched in partnership
with states. Appropriate institutional mechanisms for implementation and
participation of farmer producer organizations and cooperatives will be set up.
Makhana Board in Bihar
For this, there is a special opportunity for the people of Bihar. A Makhana
Board will be established in the state to improve production, processing, value
addition, and marketing of makhana. The people engaged in these activities will
be organized into FPOs. The Board will provide handholding and training support
to makhana farmers and will also work to ensure they receive the benefits of all
relevant Government schemes.
National Mission on High Yielding Seeds
A National Mission on High Yielding Seeds will be launched, aimed at (1)
strengthening the research ecosystem, (2) targeted development and propagation
of seeds with high yield, pest resistance and climate resilience, and (3)
01.02.2025 11
commercial availability of more than 100 seed varieties released since July 2024.
Fisheries
India ranks second-largest globally in fish production and aquaculture.
Seafood exports are valued at Rs. 60 thousand crore. To unlock the untapped
potential of the marine sector, our Government will bring in an enabling framework
for sustainable harnessing of fisheries from Indian Exclusive Economic Zone and
High Seas, with a special focus on the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep
Islands.
Mission for Cotton Productivity
For the benefit of lakhs of cotton growing farmers, I am pleased to
announce a ‘Mission for Cotton Productivity’. This 5-year mission will facilitate
significant improvements in productivity and sustainability of cotton farming, and
promote extra-long staple cotton varieties. The best of science & technology
support will be provided to farmers. Aligned with our integrated 5F vision for the
textile sector, this will help in increasing incomes of the farmers, and ensure a
steady supply of quality cotton for rejuvenating India’s traditional textile sector.
Enhanced Credit through KCC
Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) facilitate short term loans for 7.7 crore farmers,
fishermen, and dairy farmers. The loan limit under the Modified Interest
Subvention Scheme will be enhanced from Rs. 3 lakh to Rs. 5 lakh for loans taken
through the KCC.
Urea Plant in Assam
For Atmanirbharta in urea production, our Government had reopened three
01.02.2025 12
dormant urea plants in the Eastern region. To further augment urea supply, a
plant with annual capacity of 12.7 lakh metric tons will be set up at Namrup,
Assam.
India Post as a Catalyst for the Rural Economy
India Post with 1.5 lakh rural post offices, complemented by the India Post
Payment Bank and a vast network of 2.4 lakh Dak Sevaks, will be repositioned
to act as a catalyst for the rural economy.
India Post will also be transformed as a large public logistics organization.
This will meet the rising needs of Viswakarmas, new entrepreneurs, women, self-
help groups, MSMEs, and large business organizations.
Support to NCDC
Our Government will provide support to NCDC for its lending operations for
the cooperative sector.
MSMEs as the 2nd engine
Now, I move to MSMEs as the 2nd engine, which encompasses
manufacturing and services with a focus on MSMEs numbering 5.7 crore.
Revision in classification criteria for MSMEs
Currently, over 1 crore registered MSMEs, employing 7.5 crore people,
and generating 36 per cent of our manufacturing, have come together to position
India as a global manufacturing hub. With their quality products, these MSMEs
are responsible for 45 per cent of our exports. To help them achieve higher
efficiencies of scale, technological upgradation and better access to capital, the
investment and turnover limits for classification of all MSMEs will be enhanced to
01.02.2025 13
2.5 and 2 times respectively. This will give them the confidence to grow and
generate employment for our youth.
Significant enhancement of credit availability with guarantee cover
To improve access to credit, the credit guarantee cover will be enhanced:
a) For Micro and Small Enterprises, from Rs. 5 crore to 10 crore, leading to
additional credit of Rs. 1.5 lakh crore in the next 5 years;
b) For Startups, from Rs. 10 crore to 20 crore, with the guarantee fee
being moderated to 1 per cent for loans in 27 focus sectors which are
important for Atmanirbhar Bharat; and
c) For well-run exporter MSMEs, for term loans up to Rs. 20 crore.
Credit Cards for Micro Enterprises
Also, for the micro enterprises, we will introduce customized Credit Cards
with a Rs. 5 lakh limit for micro enterprises registered on Udyam portal. In the first
year, 10 lakh such cards will be issued.
Fund of Funds for Startups
The Alternate Investment Funds (AIFs) for startups have received
commitments of more than Rs. 91,000 crore. These are supported by the Fund of
Funds set up with Government of India’s contribution of Rs. 10,000 crore. Now, a
new Fund of Funds, with expanded scope and a fresh contribution of another Rs.
10,000 crore will be set up.
Scheme for First-time Entrepreneurs
A new scheme will be launched for 5 lakh women, Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes first-time entrepreneurs. This will provide term loans up
01.02.2025 14
to Rs. 2 crore during the next 5 years. The scheme will incorporate lessons from
the successful Stand-Up India scheme. Online capacity building for
entrepreneurship and managerial skills will also be organized.
Measures for Labour-Intensive Sectors
To promote employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in labour-
intensive sectors, our Government will undertake specific policy and facilitation
measures.
Focus Product Scheme for Footwear & Leather Sectors
To enhance the productivity, quality and competitiveness of India’s footwear
and leather sector, a focus product scheme will be implemented. The scheme will
support design capacity, component manufacturing, and machinery required for
production of non-leather quality footwear, besides the support for leather
footwear and products. The scheme is expected to facilitate employment for 22
lakh persons, generate turnover of over Rs. 4 lakh crore and exports of over Rs.
1.1 lakh crore.
Measures for the Toy Sector
Building on the National Action Plan for Toys, we will implement a scheme
to make India a global hub for toys. The scheme will focus on development of
clusters, skills, and a manufacturing ecosystem that will create high-quality,
unique, innovative, and sustainable toys that will represent the 'Made in India'
brand.
Support for Food Processing
In line with our commitment towards ‘Purvodaya’, we will establish a
01.02.2025 15
National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management in
Bihar. The institute will provide a strong fillip to food processing activities in the
entire Eastern region. This will result in (1) enhanced income for the farmers
through value addition to their produce, and (2) skilling, entrepreneurship and
employment opportunities for the youth.
Manufacturing Mission - Furthering “Make in India”
Our Government will set up a National Manufacturing Mission covering
small, medium and large industries for furthering “Make in India” by providing
policy support, execution roadmaps, governance and monitoring framework for
Central Ministries and States.
Clean Tech Manufacturing
Given our commitment to climate-friendly development, the Mission will also
support Clean Tech manufacturing. This will aim to improve domestic value
addition and build our ecosystem for solar PV cells, EV batteries, motors and
controllers, electrolyzers, wind turbines, very high voltage transmission equipment
and grid scale batteries.
Investment as the 3rd engine
Now, I move to Investment as the 3rd engine, which encompasses investing
in people, investing in the economy and investing in innovation.
Investing in People
Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0
The Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 programme provides nutritional
support to more than 8 crore children, 1 crore pregnant women and lactating
01.02.2025 16
mothers all over the country, and about 20 lakh adolescent girls in aspirational
districts and the north-east region. The cost norms for the nutritional support will
be enhanced appropriately.
Atal Tinkering Labs
Fifty thousand Atal Tinkering Labs will be set up in Government schools in
next 5 years to cultivate the spirit of curiosity and innovation, and foster a scientific
temper among young minds.
Broadband Connectivity to Government Secondary Schools and PHCs
Broadband connectivity will be provided to all Government secondary
schools and primary health centres in rural areas under the Bharatnet project.
Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme
We propose to implement a Bharatiya Bhasha Pustak Scheme to provide
digital-form Indian language books for school and higher education. This aims to
help students understand their subjects and their language better.
National Centres of Excellence for Skilling
Building on the initiative announced in the July 2024 Budget, five National
Centres of Excellence for skilling will be set up with global expertise and
partnerships to equip our youth with the skills required for “Make for India, Make
for the World” manufacturing. The partnerships will cover curriculum design,
training of trainers, a skills certification framework, and periodic reviews.
Expansion of Capacity in IITs
Total number of students in 23 IITs has increased 100 per cent from 65,000
to 1.35 lakh in the past 10 years. Additional infrastructure will be created in the 5
01.02.2025 17
IITs started after 2014 to facilitate education for 6,500 more students. Hostel and
other infrastructure capacity at IIT, Patna will also be expanded.
Centre of Excellence in AI for Education
I had announced three Centres of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence for
agriculture, health, and sustainable cities in 2023. Now a Centre of Excellence in
Artificial Intelligence for education will be set up with a total outlay of Rs. 500
crore.
Expansion of medical education
Our Government has added almost 1.1 lakh UG and PG medical education
seats in ten years, an increase of 130 per cent. In the next year, 10,000 additional
seats will be added in medical colleges and hospitals, towards the goal of adding
75,000 seats in the next five years.
Day Care Cancer Centres in all District Hospitals
Our Government will facilitate setting up of Day Care Cancer Centres in all
district hospitals in the next three years. 200 Centres will be established in 2025-
26 itself.
Strengthening urban livelihoods
Our Government has been giving priority to assisting urban poor and
vulnerable groups. A scheme for socio-economic upliftment of urban workers will
be implemented to help them improve their incomes, have sustainable livelihoods
and a better quality of life.
PM SVANidhi
PM SVANidhi scheme has benefitted more than 68 lakh street vendors
01.02.2025 18
giving them respite from high-interest informal sector loans. Building on this
success, the scheme will be revamped with enhanced loans from banks, UPI
linked credit cards with Rs. 30,000 limit, and capacity building support.
Social Security Scheme for Welfare of Online Platform Workers
Gig workers of online platforms provide great dynamism to the new-age
services economy. Recognising their contribution, our Government will arrange
for their identity cards and registration on the e-Shram portal. They will be
provided healthcare under PM Jan Arogya Yojana. This measure is likely to assist
nearly one crore gig-workers.
Investing in the Economy
Public Private Partnership in Infrastructure
Each infrastructure-related Ministry will come up with a three-year pipeline
of projects that can be implemented in PPP mode. States will also be encouraged
to do so and can seek support from the IIPDF (India Infrastructure Project
Development Fund) scheme to prepare PPP proposals.
Support to States for Infrastructure
An outlay of Rs. 1.5 lakh crore is proposed for the 50-year interest free
loans to States for capital expenditure and incentives for reforms.
Asset Monetization Plan 2025-30
Building on the success of the first Asset Monetization Plan announced in
2021, the second Plan for 2025-30 will be launched to plough back capital of Rs.
10 lakh crore in new projects. Regulatory and fiscal measures will be fine-tuned to
support the Plan.
01.02.2025 19
Jal Jeevan Mission
Since 2019, 15 crore households representing 80 per cent of India’s rural
population have been provided access to potable tap water connections. To
achieve 100 per cent coverage, I am pleased to announce the extension of the
Mission until 2028 with an enhanced total outlay.
The Mission’s focus will be on the quality of infrastructure and O&M of rural
piped water supply schemes through “Jan Bhagidhari”. Separate MoUs will be
signed with States/UTs, to ensure sustainability and citizen-centric water service
delivery.
Urban Sector Reforms
Building on the July Budget proposals, urban sector reforms related to
governance, municipal services, urban land, and planning will be incentivized.
Urban Challenge Fund
The Government will set up an Urban Challenge Fund of Rs. 1 lakh crore to
implement the proposals for ‘Cities as Growth Hubs’, ‘Creative Redevelopment of
Cities’ and for ‘Water and Sanitation’ purposes announced in the July Budget.
This fund will finance up to 25 per cent of the cost of bankable projects with
a stipulation that at least 50 per cent of the cost is funded from bonds, bank loans,
and PPPs. An allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore is proposed for 2025-2026.
Power Sector Reforms
We will incentivize electricity distribution reforms and augmentation of intra-
state transmission capacity by states. This will improve financial health and
capacity of electricity companies. Additional borrowing of 0.5 per cent of GSDP
01.02.2025 20
will be allowed to states, contingent on these reforms.
Nuclear Energy Mission for Viksit Bharat
Development of at least 100 GW of nuclear energy by 2047 is essential for
our energy transition efforts. For an active partnership with the private sector
towards this goal, amendments to the Atomic Energy Act and the Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage Act will be taken up.
A Nuclear Energy Mission for research & development of Small Modular
Reactors (SMR) with an outlay of Rs. 20,000 crore will be set up. At least 5
indigenously developed Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) will be operationalized
by 2033.
Shipbuilding
The Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Policy will be revamped to address
cost disadvantages. This will also include Credit Notes for shipbreaking in Indian
yards to promote the circular economy.
Large ships above a specified size will be included in the infrastructure
harmonized master list (HML).
Shipbuilding Clusters will be facilitated to increase the range, categories
and capacity of ships. This will include additional infrastructure facilities, skilling
and technology to develop the entire ecosystem.
Maritime Development Fund
For long-term financing for the maritime industry, a Maritime Development
Fund with a corpus of Rs. 25,000 crore will be set up. This will be for distributed
support and promoting competition. This will have up to 49 per cent contribution
01.02.2025 21
by the Government, and the balance will be mobilized from ports and from private
sector.
UDAN - Regional Connectivity Scheme
UDAN has enabled 1.5 crore middle-class people to meet their aspirations
for speedier travel. The scheme has connected 88 airports and operationalized
619 routes. Inspired by that success, a modified UDAN scheme will be launched
to enhance regional connectivity to 120 new destinations and carry 4 crore
additional passengers in the next 10 years. … (Interruptions) The scheme will also
support helipads and smaller airports in hilly, aspirational, and North East regional
districts.
Greenfield Airport in Bihar
Greenfield airports will be facilitated in Bihar to meet the future needs of the
State. … (Interruptions) These will be in addition to the expansion of the capacity
of Patna airport and a brownfield airport in Bihta. … (Interruptions)
Western Koshi Canal Project in Mithilanchal
Financial support will be provided for the Western Koshi Canal ERM Project
benefitting a large number of farmers cultivating over 50,000 hectares of land in
the Mithilanchal region of Bihar.
Mining Sector Reforms
Mining sector reforms, including those for minor minerals, will be
encouraged through sharing of best practices and institution of a State Mining
Index.
A policy for recovery of critical minerals from tailings will be brought out.
01.02.2025 22
SWAMIH Fund 2
Under the Special Window for Affordable and Mid-Income Housing
(SWAMIH) fifty thousand dwelling units in stressed housing projects have been
completed, and keys handed over to home-buyers. Another forty-thousand units
will be completed in 2025, further helping middle-class families who were paying
EMIs on loans taken for apartments, while also paying rent for their current
dwellings.
Building on this success, SWAMIH Fund 2 will be established as a blended
finance facility with contribution from the Government, banks and private
investors. This fund of Rs. 15,000 crore will aim for expeditious completion of
another one lakh units.
PM Gati Shakti Data for Private Sector
For furthering PPPs and assisting the private sector in project planning,
access to relevant data and maps from the PM Gati Shakti portal will be provided.
Tourism for employment-led growth
Top 50 tourist destination sites in the country will be developed in
partnership with states through a challenge mode. Land for building key
infrastructure will have to be provided by states. Hotels in those destinations will
be included in the infrastructure harmonized list.
The following measures will be taken for facilitating employment-led growth:
1) Organizing intensive skill-development programmes for our youth
including in Institutes of Hospitality Management;
2) Providing MUDRA loans for homestays;
01.02.2025 23
3) Improving ease of travel and connectivity to tourist destinations;
4) Providing performance-linked incentives to states for effective
destination management including tourist amenities, cleanliness, and
marketing efforts; and
5) Introducing streamlined e-visa facilities along with visa-fee waivers for
certain tourist groups.
Continuing with the emphasis on places of spiritual and religious
significance in the July Budget, there will be a special focus on destinations
related to the life and times of Lord Buddha.
Medical Tourism and Heal in India
Medical Tourism and Heal in India will be promoted in partnership with the
private sector along with capacity building and easier visa norms.
Investing in Innovation
Research, Development and Innovation
To implement private sector driven Research, Development and Innovation
initiative announced in the July Budget, I am now allocating
Rs. 20,000 crore.
Deep Tech Fund of Funds
A Deep Tech Fund of Funds will also be explored to catalyse the next
generation startups as a part of this initiative.
PM Research Fellowship
In the next five years, under the PM Research Fellowship scheme, we will
provide ten thousand fellowships for technological research in IITs and IISc with
01.02.2025 24
enhanced financial support.
Gene Bank for Crops Germplasm
The 2nd Gene Bank with 10 lakh germplasm lines will be set up for future
food and nutritional security. This will provide conservation support to both public
and private sectors for genetic resources.
National Geospatial Mission
We will start a National Geospatial Mission to develop foundational
geospatial infrastructure and data. Using PM Gati Shakti, this Mission will facilitate
modernization of land records, urban planning, and design of infrastructure
projects.
Gyan Bharatam Mission
A Gyan Bharatam Mission for survey, documentation and conservation of
our manuscript heritage with academic institutions, museums, libraries and private
collectors will be undertaken to cover more than 1 crore manuscripts. We will set
up a National Digital Repository of Indian knowledge systems for knowledge
sharing.
Now, I move to Exports as the 4th engine.
Exports as the 4th engine
Export Promotion Mission
We will set up an Export Promotion Mission, with sectoral and ministerial
targets, driven jointly by the Ministries of Commerce, MSME, and Finance. It will
facilitate easy access to export credit, cross-border factoring support, and support
to MSMEs to tackle non-tariff measures in overseas markets.
01.02.2025 25
Bharat Trade Net
A digital public infrastructure, ‘BharatTradeNet’ (BTN) for international trade
will be set-up as a unified platform for trade documentation and financing
solutions. This will complement the Unified Logistics Interface Platform. The BTN
will be aligned with international practices.
Support for integration with Global Supply Chains
Support will be provided to develop domestic manufacturing capacities for
our economy’s integration with global supply chains. Sectors will be identified
based on objective criteria.
Facilitation groups with participation of senior officers and industry
representatives will be formed for select products and supply chains.
Through this, there are huge opportunities related to Industry 4.0, which
needs high skills and talent. Our youth have both. Our Government will support
the domestic electronic equipment industry to leverage this opportunity for the
benefit of the youth.
National Framework for GCC
A national framework will be formulated as guidance to states for promoting
Global Capability Centres in emerging tier 2 cities. This will suggest measures for
enhancing availability of talent and infrastructure, building-byelaw reforms, and
mechanisms for collaboration with industry.
Warehousing facility for air cargo
Our Government will facilitate upgradation of infrastructure and
warehousing for air cargo including high value perishable horticulture produce.
01.02.2025 26
Cargo screening and customs protocols will be streamlined and made user-
friendly.
Reforms as the Fuel
Now I move to ‘Reforms as the Fuel’, and detail specific reforms.
Tax Reforms
Over the past 10 years, our Government has implemented several reforms
for convenience of tax payers, such as (1) faceless assessment, (2) tax payers
charter, (3) faster returns, (4) almost 99 per cent returns being on self-assessment,
and (5) Vivad se Vishwas scheme. … (Interruptions) Continuing these efforts, I
reaffirm the commitment of the tax department to “trust first, scrutinize later”. I also
propose to introduce the new income-tax bill next week. I will detail the indirect tax
reforms and changes in direct taxes in Part B.
Financial Sector Reforms and Development
FDI in Insurance Sector
The FDI limit for the insurance sector will be raised from 74 to 100 per cent.
This enhanced limit will be available for those companies which invest the entire
premium in India. The current guardrails and conditionalities associated with
foreign investment will be reviewed and simplified.
Expanding Services of India Post Payment Bank
The services of India Post Payment Bank will be deepened and expanded
in rural areas.
Credit Enhancement Facility by NaBFID
NaBFID will set up a 'Partial Credit Enhancement Facility' for corporate
01.02.2025 27
bonds for infrastructure.
Grameen Credit Score
Public Sector Banks will develop 'Grameen Credit Score' framework to
serve the credit needs of SHG members and people in rural areas.
Pension Sector
A forum for regulatory coordination and development of pension products
will be set up.
KYC Simplification
To implement the earlier announcement on simplifying the KYC processes,
the revamped Central KYC Registry will be rolled out in 2025. We will also
implement a streamlined system for periodic updating.
Merger of Companies
Requirements and procedures for speedy approval of company mergers
will be rationalized. The scope for fast-track mergers will also be widened and the
process made simpler.
Bilateral Investment Treaties
As proposed in the Interim Budget, we signed Bilateral Investment Treaties
(BIT) with two countries in 2024. To encourage sustained foreign investment and
in the spirit of 'first develop India', the current model BIT will be revamped and
made more investor-friendly.
Regulatory Reforms
In the last ten years in several aspects, including financial and non-
financial, our Government has demonstrated a steadfast commitment to 'Ease of
01.02.2025 28
Doing Business'. We are determined to ensure that our regulations must keep up
with technological innovations and global policy developments. A light-touch
regulatory framework based on principles and trust will unleash productivity and
employment. Through this framework, we will update regulations that were made
under old laws. To develop this modern, flexible, people-friendly, and trust-based
regulatory framework appropriate for the twenty-first century, I propose four
specific measures:
High Level Committee for Regulatory Reforms
A High-Level Committee for Regulatory Reforms will be set up for a review
of all non-financial sector regulations, certifications, licenses, and permissions.
The committee will be expected to make recommendations within a year. The
objective is to strengthen trust-based economic governance and take
transformational measures to enhance 'ease of doing business', especially in
matters of inspections and compliances. States will be encouraged to join in this
endeavour.
Investment Friendliness Index of States
An Investment Friendliness Index of States will be launched in 2025 to
further the spirit of competitive cooperative federalism.
FSDC Mechanism
Under the Financial Stability and Development Council, a mechanism will
be set up to evaluate impact of the current financial regulations and subsidiary
instructions. It will also formulate a framework to enhance their responsiveness
and development of the financial sector.
01.02.2025 29
Jan Vishwas Bill 2.0
In the Jan Vishwas Act 2023, more than 180 legal provisions were
decriminalized. Our Government will now bring up the Jan Vishwas Bill 2.0 to
decriminalize more than 100 provisions in various laws.
Fiscal Policy
I now move to fiscal policy matters.
Fiscal Consolidation
In the July Budget, I had committed to staying the course for fiscal
consolidation. Our endeavour will be to keep the fiscal deficit each year such that
the Central Government debt remains on a declining path as a percentage of the
GDP. The roadmap for the next 6 years has been detailed in the FRBM
statement.
Revised Estimates 2024-25
The Revised Estimate of the total receipts other than borrowings is Rs.
31.47 lakh crore, of which the net tax receipts are Rs. 25.57 lakh crore. The
Revised Estimate of the total expenditure is Rs. 47.16 lakh crore, of which the
capital expenditure is about Rs. 10.18 lakh crore.
The Revised Estimate of the fiscal deficit is 4.8 per cent of the GDP.
Budget Estimates 2025-26
Coming to 2025-26, the total receipts other than borrowings and the total
expenditure are estimated at Rs.34.96 lakh crore and Rs.50.65 lakh crore
respectively. The net tax receipts are estimated at Rs.28.37 lakh crore.
The fiscal deficit is estimated to be 4.4 per cent of GDP.
01.02.2025 30
To finance the fiscal deficit, the net market borrowings from dated securities
are estimated at Rs.11.54 lakh crore. The balance financing is expected to come
from small savings and other sources. The gross market borrowings are
estimated at Rs.14.82 lakh crore.
I will now move to Part B.
PART B
Indirect Taxes
My proposals relating to Customs aim to rationalize tariff structure and
address duty inversion. These will also support domestic manufacturing and value
addition, promote exports, facilitate trade and provide relief to common people.
Rationalisation of Customs Tariff Structure for Industrial Goods
As a part of comprehensive review of Customs rate structure announced in
July 2024 Budget, I propose to:
(i) remove seven tariff rates. This is over and above the seven tariff rates
removed in 2023-24 budget. After this, there will be only eight remaining
tariff rates including ‘zero’ rate.
(ii) apply appropriate cess to broadly maintain effective duty incidence
except on a few items, where such incidence will reduce marginally.
(iii) levy not more than one cess or surcharge. Therefore, I propose to
exempt Social Welfare Surcharge on 82 tariff lines that are subject to a
cess.
I shall now take up sector specific proposals.
01.02.2025 31
Relief on import of Drugs/Medicines
To provide relief to patients, particularly those suffering from cancer, rare
diseases and other severe chronic diseases, I propose to add 36 lifesaving drugs
and medicines to the list of medicines fully exempted from Basic Custom Duty
(BCD). I also propose to add 6 lifesaving medicines to the list attracting
concessional custom duty of 5%. Full exemption and concessional duty will also
respectively apply on the bulk drugs for manufacture of the above.
Specified drugs and medicines under Patient Assistance Programmes run
by the pharmaceutical companies are fully exempt from BCD, provided the
medicines are supplied free of cost to the patients. I propose to add 37 more
medicines along with 13 new patient assistance programmes.
Support to Domestic Manufacturing and Value addition
Critical Minerals
In the July 2024 Budget, I had fully exempted BCD on 25 critical minerals
that are not domestically available. I had also reduced BCD of 2 other such
minerals to provide a major fillip to their processing especially by MSMEs. Now, I
propose to fully exempt cobalt powder and waste, the scrap of lithium-ion battery,
Lead, Zinc and 12 more critical minerals. This will help secure their availability for
manufacturing in India and promote more jobs for our youth.
Textiles
To promote domestic production of technical textile products such as agro-
textiles, medical textiles and geo textiles at competitive prices, I propose to add
two more types of shuttle-less looms to the list of fully exempted textile
01.02.2025 32
machinery. I also propose to revise the BCD rate on knitted fabrics covered by
nine tariff lines from “10% or 20%” to “20% or Rs.115 per kg, whichever is higher”.
Electronic Goods
In line with our ‘Make in India’ policy, and to rectify inverted duty structure, I
propose to increase the BCD on Interactive Flat Panel Display (IFPD) from 10%
to 20% and reduce the BCD to 5% on Open Cell and other components.
In 2023-24 Budget, for the manufacture of Open Cells of LCD/LED TVs, I
had reduced the BCD on parts of Open Cells from 5% to 2.5%. To further boost
the manufacture of such Open Cells, the BCD on these parts will now stand
exempted.
Lithium Ion Battery
To the list of exempted capital goods, I propose to add 35 additional capital
goods for EV battery manufacturing, and 28 additional capital goods for mobile
phone battery manufacturing. This will boost domestic manufacture of lithium-ion
batteries, both for mobile phones and for electric vehicles.
Shipping Sector
Considering that shipbuilding has a long gestation period, I propose to
continue the exemption of BCD on raw materials, components, consumables or
parts for the manufacture of ships for another ten years. I also propose the same
dispensation for ship breaking to make it more competitive. … (Interruptions)
(cid:174)ी आनंद भदौ(cid:229)रया (धौरहरा) : इन आंकड़(cid:332) के साथ-साथ कंुभ के बार े म(cid:164) भी बता दीिजए ।…
((cid:211)यवधान)
01.02.2025 33
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN:
Telecommunication
To prevent classification disputes, I propose to reduce the BCD from 20%
to 10% on Carrier Grade ethernet switches to make it at par with Non-Carrier
Grade ethernet switches.
Export Promotion
Handicraft Goods
To facilitate exports of handicrafts, I propose to extend the time period for
export from six months to one year, further extendable by another three months, if
required. I also propose to add nine items to the list of duty-free inputs.
Leather sector
I propose to fully exempt BCD on Wet Blue leather to facilitate imports for
domestic value addition and employment. I also propose to exempt crust leather
from 20% export duty to facilitate exports by small tanners.
Marine products
To enhance India's competitiveness in the global seafood market, I
propose to reduce BCD from 30% to 5% on Frozen Fish Paste (Surimi) for
manufacture and export of its analogue products. I also propose to reduce BCD
from 15% to 5% on fish hydrolysates for manufacture of fish and shrimp feeds.
Domestic MROs for Railway Goods
In July 2024 Budget, to promote development of domestic MROs for
aircraft and ships, I had extended the time limit for export of foreign origin goods
that were imported for repairs, from 6 months to one year and further extendable
01.02.2025 34
by one year. I now propose to extend the same dispensation for railway goods.
Trade facilitation
Time Limit for Provisional Assessment
Presently, the Customs Act, 1962 does not provide any time limit to finalize
Provisional Assessments leading to uncertainty and cost to trade. As a measure
of promoting ease of doing business, I propose to fix a time-limit of two years,
extendable by a year, for finalising the provisional assessment.
Voluntary Compliance
I propose to introduce a new provision that will enable importers or
exporters, after clearance of goods, to voluntarily declare material facts and pay
duty with interest but without penalty. This will incentivise voluntary compliance.
However, this will not apply in cases where department has already initiated audit
or investigation proceedings.
Extended Time for End Use
For industry to better plan their imports, I propose to extend the time limit
for the end-use of imported inputs in the relevant rules, from six months to one
year. This will provide operational flexibility in view of cost and uncertainty of
supply. Further, such importers will now have to file only quarterly statements
instead of a monthly statement. … (Interruptions)
12.00 hrs
(cid:174)ी आनंद भदौ(cid:229)रया: कु(cid:204)भ म(cid:164) गायब लोग(cid:332) का पता कराइये िक वे कहां गायब हो गए ह(cid:167)? … ((cid:211)यवधान)
Direct Taxes
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I now come to my Direct tax proposals.
01.02.2025 35
In Part A, I have briefly underlined Taxation Reforms as one of key reforms
to realize our vision of Viksit Bharat. In respect of criminal law, our Government
had earlier ushered in Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita replacing Bharatiya Danda
Sanhita. I am happy to inform this August House and the country that the new
income-tax bill will carry forward the same spirit of “Nyaya” in its drafting as well.
The new bill will be clear and direct in text with close to half of the present law, in
terms of both chapters and words. It will be simple to understand for taxpayers
and tax administrators, leading to tax certainty and reduced litigation.
Reforms, however, are not a destination. They are a means to achieve
good governance for our people and economy. Providing good governance
primarily involves being responsive. The Thirukkural captures this in Verse 542,
which reads:
vaanokki vaalum ulakellaam mannavan
koalnokki vaalung kuti
Meaning:
Just as living beings live expecting rains,
Citizens live expecting good governance.
Our Government is committed to keeping an ear to the ground and a finger
on the pulse, and responding while balancing our nation-building efforts. The
following measures will detail just how our Government under the guidance of PM
Modi has taken steps to understand and address. … (Interruptions)
(cid:174)ी अिखलशे यादव (क(cid:198)नौज) : यूपी को भी थोड़ी सी गाइड(cid:164)स िमल जाए । … ((cid:211)यवधान)
SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: I repeat that sentence. The following
01.02.2025 36
measures will detail just how our Government under the guidance of PM Modi
has taken steps to understand and address the needs voiced by our citizens. My
tax proposals are guided by this spirit.
The objectives of my proposals are as follows:
(i) Personal Income Tax reforms with special focus on middle class
(ii) Rationalization of TDS/TCS for easing difficulties
(iii) Encouraging voluntary compliance
(iv) Reducing compliance burden
(v) Ease of doing business
(vi) Employment and investment
I will come to my proposal on personal income tax towards the end.
TDS/TCS rationalization for easing difficulties
I propose to rationalize Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) by reducing the
number of rates and thresholds above which TDS is deducted. Further, threshold
amounts for tax deduction will be increased for better clarity and uniformity. The
limit for tax deduction on interest for senior citizens is being doubled from the
present Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 1 lakh. Similarly, the annual limit of Rs. 2.40 lakh for
TDS on rent is being increased to Rs. 6 lakh. This will reduce the number of
transactions liable to TDS, thus benefitting small tax payers receiving small
payments.
The threshold to collect tax at source (TCS) on remittances under RBI’s
Liberalized Remittance Scheme (LRS) is proposed to be increased from Rs. 7
lakh to Rs. 10 lakh. I also propose to remove TCS on remittances for education
01.02.2025 37
purposes, where such remittance is out of a loan taken from a specified financial
institution.
Both TDS and TCS are being applied on any transaction relating to sale of
goods. To prevent such compliance difficulties, I propose to omit the TCS. I also
propose that the provisions of the higher TDS deduction will now apply only in
non-PAN cases.
In July 2024, the delay for payment of TDS up to the due date of filing
statement was decriminalized. I propose to provide the same relaxation to TCS
provisions as well.
Encouraging Voluntary Compliance
The Government under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi believes in
“Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas and Sabka Prayas”. In line with this,
we brought in updated return facility in 2022 for voluntary compliance by
taxpayers who had omitted to report their correct income. Our trust in taxpayers
was proved right. Nearly 90 lakh taxpayers voluntarily updated their incomes by
paying additional tax. Taking this trust further, I now propose to extend the time-
limit to file updated returns for any assessment year, from the current limit of two
years, to four years.
Reducing Compliance Burden
I propose to reduce the compliance burden for small charitable trusts and
institutions by increasing their period of registration from 5 years to 10 years. It is
also proposed that disproportionate consequences do not arise for minor defaults,
such as incomplete applications filed by charitable entities.
01.02.2025 38
Presently tax-payers can claim the annual value of self-occupied properties
as nil only on the fulfilment of certain conditions. Considering the difficulties faced
by taxpayers, it is proposed to allow the benefit of two such self-occupied
properties without any condition.
Ease of Doing Business
To streamline the process of transfer pricing and to provide an alternative
to yearly examination, I propose to introduce a scheme for determining arm’s
length price of international transaction for a block period of three years. This will
be in line with global best practices.
With a view to reduce litigation and provide certainty in international
taxation, the scope of safe harbour rules is being expanded.
A number of senior and very senior citizens have very old National Savings
Scheme accounts. As interest is no longer payable on such accounts, I propose
to exempt withdrawals made from NSS by individuals on or after 29th of August,
2024. I am also proposing to allow similar treatment to NPS Vatsalya accounts as
is available to normal NPS accounts, subject to overall limits.
In my speech in July 2024, I had promised that all processes including
giving effect to appellate orders shall be digitalized and made paper-less over the
next two years. So, I am happy to announce that digitalization is being made
operational.
In July 2024, we brought in the Vivad Se Vishwas Scheme to resolve
income tax disputes pending in appeal. The scheme has received a great
response, with nearly 33,000 tax payers having availed of this scheme to settle
01.02.2025 39
their disputes.
Employment and Investment
I have a few proposals to promote investment and employment.
Tax certainty for electronics manufacturing Schemes
It is proposed to provide a presumptive taxation regime for non-residents
who provide services to a resident company that is establishing or operating an
electronics manufacturing facility. I further propose to introduce a safe harbour for
tax certainty for non-residents who store components for supply to specified
electronics manufacturing units.
Tonnage Tax Scheme for Inland Vessels
Presently the tonnage tax scheme is available to only sea going ships. The
benefits of existing tonnage tax scheme are proposed to be extended to inland
vessels registered under the Indian Vessels Act, 2021 to promote inland water
transport in the country.
Extension for incorporation of Start-Ups
We continue to support the Indian start-up eco-system. I propose to extend
the period of incorporation by 5 years to allow the benefit available to start-ups
which are incorporated before 1.4.2030.
International Financial Services Centre (IFSC)
In order to attract and promote additional activities in the IFSC, I am inter
alia proposing specific benefits to ship-leasing units, insurance offices and
treasury centres of global companies which are set up in IFSC. Further, to claim
benefits, the cut-off date for commencement in IFSC has also been extended by
01.02.2025 40
five years to 31.3.2030.
Alternate Investment Funds (AIFs)
Category I and category II AIFs are undertaking investments in
infrastructure and other such sectors. I propose to provide certainty of taxation to
these entities on the gains from securities.
Extension of investment date for Sovereign and Pension Funds
To promote funding from Sovereign Wealth Funds and Pension Funds to
the infrastructure sector, I propose to extend the date of making an investment by
five more years, to 31st March, 2030.
Personal Income- tax Reforms with special focus on middle class
Democracy, Demography and Demand are the key support pillars in our
journey towards Viksit Bharat. The middle class provides strength for India’s
growth. This Government under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi has always
believed in the admirable energy and ability of the middle class in nation building.
In recognition of their contribution, we have periodically reduced their tax burden.
Right after 2014, the ‘Nil tax’ slab was raised to Rs. 2.5 lakh, which was further
raised to Rs. 5 lakh in 2019 and to Rs. 7 lakh in 2023. This is reflective of our
Government’s trust on the middle-class tax payers. I am now happy to announce
that there will be no income tax payable upto income of Rs. 12 lakh (i.e. average
income of Rs. 1 lakh per month other than special rate income such as capital
gains) under the new regime. This limit will be Rs. 12.75 lakh for salaried tax
payers, due to standard deduction of Rs. 75,000.
Slabs and rates are being changed across the board to benefit all tax-
01.02.2025 41
payers. The new structure will substantially reduce the taxes of the middle class
and leave more money in their hands, boosting household consumption, savings
and investment.
In the new tax regime, I propose to revise tax rate structure as follows:
0-4 lakh rupees Nil
4-8 lakh rupees 5 per cent
8-12 lakh rupees 10 per cent
12-16 lakh rupees 15 per cent
16-20 lakh rupees 20 per cent
20-24 lakh rupees 25 per cent
Above 24 lakh rupees 30 per cent
To tax payers upto Rs. 12 lakh of normal income (other than special rate
income such as capital gains), I read that again, to tax payers upto Rs. 12 lakh of
income (other than special rate income such as capital gains), tax rebate is being
provided in addition to the benefit due to slab rate reduction in such a manner that
there is no tax payable by them. The total tax benefit of slab rate changes and
rebate at different income levels can be illustrated with a few examples.
A tax payer in the new regime with an income of Rs. 12 lakh will get a
benefit of Rs. 80,000 in tax (which is 100% of tax payable as per existing rates). A
person having income of Rs. 18 lakh will get a benefit of Rs. 70,000 in tax (30%
of tax payable as per existing rates). A person with an income of Rs. 25 lakh gets
a benefit of Rs. 1,10,000 (25% of his tax payable as per existing rates).
01.02.2025 42
As a result of these proposals, hon. Speaker Sir, revenue of about Rs. 1
lakh crore in direct taxes and Rs. 2,600 crore in indirect taxes will be forgone.
Mr. Speaker Sir, with this, I commend the budget to this august House.
Jai Hind.
_________
12.15 hrs
STATEMENTS RE:
(i) MEDIUM- TERM FISCAL POLICY CUM
FISCAL POLICY STRATEGY;
AND

(ii) MACRO-ECONOMIC FRAMEWORK
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : आइटम नंबर 2, (cid:174)ीमती िनम(cid:170)ला सीतारमण जी ।
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, with your permission, I rise to lay on
the Table the following Statements under section 3(1) of the Fiscal Responsibility
and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003:-
1. Medium-term Fiscal Policy cum Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement; and
2. Macro-economic Framework Statement.
________
 Laid on the Table and also placed in Library See No. LT 1871 /18/25.
01.02.2025 43
12.16 hrs

FINANCE BILL, 2025
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : आइटम नंबर 3, माननीय मं(cid:253)ी जी ।
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE; AND MINISTER OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS
(SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN): Sir, with your permission, I rise to move
for leave to introduce a Bill to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central
Government for the financial year 2025-2026. … (Interruptions)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : (cid:255)(cid:307) यह है :
“िक िव(cid:176)ीय वष(cid:170) 2025-26 के िलए के (cid:198)(cid:254)ीय सरकार क(cid:236) िव(cid:176)ीय (cid:255)(cid:214)थापनाओ ं को
(cid:255)भावी करने के िलए िवधेयक को पुर:(cid:214)थािपत करने क(cid:236) अनमु ित दी जाए ।”
(cid:255)(cid:214)ताव (cid:214)वीकृत ह(cid:242)आ ।

SHRIMATI NIRMALA SITHARAMAN: Sir, I introduce the Bill. … (Interruptions)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : िव(cid:176) िवधेयक, 2025 परु :(cid:214)थािपत िकया गया ।
… ((cid:211)यवधान)
माननीय अ(cid:197)य(cid:177) : सभा क(cid:236) काय(cid:170)वाही सोमवार, 3 फरवरी, 2025 को (cid:255)ात: 11 बजे तक के िलए
(cid:214)थिगत क(cid:236) जाती है ।
12.17 hrs
The Lok Sabha then adjourned till Eleven of the Clock on
Monday, February 03, 2025/Magha 14, 1946 (Saka).
_________
 Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section-2 dated 01.02.2025.
 Introduced with the recommendation of the President.
INTERNET
The Original Version of Lok Sabha proceedings is available on Parliament of India Website at the
following address:
www.sansad.in/ls
LIVE TELECAST OF PROCEEDINGS OF LOK SABHA
Lok Sabha proceedings are being telecast live on Sansad T.V. Channel. Live telecast begins at 11
A.M. everyday the Lok Sabha sits, till the adjournment of the House.
_________________________________________________________________________________
Published under Rules 379 and 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition)
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
